Insomnia is a critical issue facing Americans today. According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 12% of the United States population faces chronic insomnia. Moreover, Columbia University’s Department of Psychiatry states this results in a plethora of issues: trouble focusing; feeling depressed, anxiousness; and feeling unmotivated. I, myself, have faced sleep deprivation and have seen how detrimental it is to my health. It makes me feel like a shell of myself - constantly tired, anxious, and irritable. The purpose of this project was to create a highly accurate tool for insomnia self-screening to help many people overcome insomnia. Current methods of insomnia treatment are often unreliable, placing heavy bias in the questioning. My method to address this issue was to use machine learning to create a model that can screen users for insomnia. I have created a completely free, accurate, and interpretable insomnia screening model. My model was trained off of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)  2017-2020 Pre-Pandemic Questionnaire. This is a comprehensive, cross sectional survey covering detailed health, demographic, nutrition, and behavior data from the CDC. In the model, the x variable was the various selected features from the NHANES dataset. The y variable was the NHANES column trouble_sleeping, which is being assigned as the insomnia indicator. For the results, my model has achieved extremely high metric results in the following categories: accuracy,precision, recall, f1, and AUC, boasting a 95% recall accuracy. This insomnia screening model was deployed using Fast API to create a web platform. In conclusion, my model met the design criteria for creating a tool for insomnia self-screening and could be potentially used in the future in clinical environments. To view the entire code used to make this model you can view the Machine_Learning_Tool_for_Insomnia_Screening_Using_NHANES_Data file. All of the other files are the requirements used to deploy the model.

